# Happiness

Happiness is a mechanic that is summed up in two statistics: *appeal* and *grievances*. 

### Appeal

Appeal is a factor of a city based on:

- The amount of excess food and materials in the city;
- The diversity of luxury resources in the city;
- The total culture of the city.

Cities with higher appeal attract higher rates of migration, both active and passive. 

### Grievances

Grievances, also more generally called unhappiness, are a composite of problems local citizens have with the governance of the city. Grievances may often not be generated at all in a city. 

Grievances are generated by:
- Differences between cultures and cultural institutions in the city;
- The use of military police in the city;
- Drafting citizens from the city;
- Starvation, or generally a lack of food.

Grievances detract from appeal, and additionally reduce productivity.

### Secession

If a city has low appeal, high grievances, and has a single majority (at least half of total) culture that is not of the city owner, then the city secedes. 

For a city to secede, there has to be one culture that:
 - Has at least 50% of the share of total culture in the city;
 - Is not the culture of the city's current owner. 

If a city then secedes, the owner of the city (if they accept it) becomes the civilisation to which that majority culture belongs. 

It may be the case that the majority culture is "local culture", in which case the city becomes an independent city. This also happens if the civilisation to which the city would go chooses not to accept the city.

All tiles worked by the city change their ownership to the city's new owner. 